README.md, before:

[![Actions Status](https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap/workflows/Node%20CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/bigeasy/wildmap/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/bigeasy/wildmap)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

A map keyed by path with wildcard matching.

| What          | Where                                         |
| --- | --- |
| Discussion    | https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap/issues/1   |
| Documentation | https://bigeasy.github.io/wildmap             |
| Source        | https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap            |
| Issues        | https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap/issues     |
| CI            | https://travis-ci.org/bigeasy/wildmap         |
| Coverage:     | https://codecov.io/gh/bigeasy/wildmap         |
| License:      | MIT                                           |

WildMap installs from NPM.

```
npm install wildmap
```

## Living `README.md`

This `README.md` is also a unit test using the
[Proof](https://github.com/bigeasy/proof) unit test framework. We'll use the
Proof `okay` function to assert out statements in the readme. A Proof unit test
generally looks like this.

```javascript
require('proof')(4, okay => {
    okay('always okay')
    okay(true, 'okay if true')
    okay(1, 1, 'okay if equal')
    okay({ value: 1 }, { value: 1 }, 'okay if deep strict equal')
})
```

You can run this unit test yourself to see the output from the various
code sections of the readme.

```text
git clone git@github.com:bigeasy/wildmap.git
cd wildmap
npm install --no-package-lock --no-save
node test/readme.t.js
```

## Overview

**TODO** Rough draft. Baby English.

WildMap is a map keyed on an array that acts as a path. These keys are usually
derived from file paths or similar. You can use WildMap to store values by a
path and retrieve them individually or through globbing.

The WileMap module exports a single `WildMap` class.

```javascript
const WildMap = require('wildmap')
```

Wnen you construct a WildMap you provide sigils for globbing.  The `single`
sigil is used to match a single element in a path. The `recursive` sigil will
match one or more elements in a path.

```javascript
const wildmap = new WildMap({ single: '*', recursive: '**' })
```

Items in the wild map are indexed by an array that represents a path. The array
must have at least one element representing the root of the path according to
your application. Handily enough, when you split an absolute path string, you
end up with an empty string as the first element. You can use that as your root.

```javascript
okay('/hello/world'.split('/'), [ '', 'hello', 'world' ], 'result of path split')
```

You set a value in the wild map calling `set` with an array path and a key
value.

```javascript
wildmap.set('/hello/world'.split('/'), 'a')
```

To get a value from the wild map you provide the same array key.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.get('/hello/world'.split('/')), 'a', 'get')
```

You can use `undefined` as a value and if you do, you won't be certain if an
item exists in your wild map using `get`. To determine if a path exists and it
has a value assigned use `has`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.has('/hello/world'.split('/')), 'has')
okay(! wildmap.has('/hello/earth'.split('/')), 'has not')
```

The `has` method determines if the path exists in the wild and if a value is
set. Not every path that exists in wild map has a value set. In our example
`/hello` was created automatically when we set `/hello/world`. No value was set
for `/hello`.

```javascript
okay(! wildmap.has('/hello'.split('/')), 'has not automatically created')
```

It does exist however, and that might be nice to know, so we can use `exists` to
determine if a path exists in the wild map regardless of whether it has a value
set.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello/world'.split('/')), 'exists')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello'.split('/')), 'parent exists')
okay(wildmap.exists([ '' ]), 'root exists')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/earth'.split('/')), 'does not exist')
```

Notice that neither `get`, `has`, nor `exists` will  perform any sort of parital
matching. Matching a parent does not return a list of children. Matching a
non-existant child does return a parent. We do that sort of thing with `glob`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.get('/hello'.split('/')), (void(0)), 'get parent')
okay(wildmap.get('/hello/world/wide'.split('/')), (void(0)), 'get missing child')
```

Only `glob` performs globbing. None of the other functions will evaluate the
wildcard.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.get('/hello/*'.split('/')), (void(0)), 'get wildcard does not work')
```

Before we look at globbing let's add another element to our wild map.

```javascript
wildmap.set('/hello/earth/beings'.split('/'), 'b')
```

We use the `glob` method to perform globbing.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.glob('/hello/*'.split('/')), [[ '', 'hello', 'world' ]], 'glob single wildcard')
```

Globbed recursive.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.glob('.hello.**'.split('.')), [[
    '', 'hello', 'world'
], [
    '', 'hello', 'earth'
], [
    '', 'hello', 'earth', 'beings'
]], 'glob recursive wildcard end')
```

Globbed recursive midway. Each recursive glob must match at least one part of
the path.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.glob('/**/world'.split('/')), [[ '', 'hello', 'world' ]], 'glob recursive wildcard end')
```

You can list all the children for a particular node using `list`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.list('/hello'.split('/')), [ 'world', 'earth' ], 'list')
```

If there are no children the list will be empty.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.list('/hello/world'.split('/')), [], 'list empty')
```

If there is no such node at all in the wild map, `list` returns `null`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.list('/hello/dolly'.split('/')), null, 'list null')
```

```javascript
okay(wildmap.glob('.**.**'.split('.')), [[
    '', 'hello', 'world'
], [
    '', 'hello', 'earth'
], [
    '', 'hello', 'earth', 'beings'
]], 'glob recursive double wildcards')
```

One application I've found for WileMap is to model a directory structure for an
`etcd`-alike called [Addendum](https://github.com/bigeasy/addendum).

When we want to remove items from our wild map we once again run into the
distinction between `has` and `exists`.

When we want to move a value from our wild map we use `unset`. If the path has
no children then the path is removed from the tree and it no longer `has` the
bath and the path no longer `exists`. We then look at the parent path.

If we do remove the path we look at the parent path. If it does not have a value
set and it has no more children now that the one child has been removed we
remove it as well.

```text
/
    /hello
        /world => a
        /earth
            beings => b
```

The map now contains the above tree. When we unset `/hello/earth/beings` the
`beings` part no longer has a value and has no children so it is removed from
the tree. Then because `/hello/earth` has no value and no longer has children it
is removed. `/hello` still has a child so it remains.

When we use remove, we remove a path from a tree regardless of whether or not
it has child paths. Once removed look at the parent path. If it does not have a
value set and it has no more children now that the one child has been removed we
remove it as well.

Let's add a path to the wild map.

```javascript
wildmap.set('/hello/dolly/oh/hello/dolly'.split('/'), 'b')
```

Now our wild map tree looks like this.

```text
/
    /hello
        /world => a
        /dolly
            /oh
                /hello
                    /dolly => b
```

When we remove `/hello/dolly/oh/hello` we will remove that path and all
children. We will then remove `/hello/dolly/oh` and then `/hello/dolly`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello'.split('/')), 'great grand parent exists')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'great parent exists')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh'.split('/')), 'parent exists')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh/hello'.split('/')), 'target exists')
okay(wildmap.has('/hello/dolly/oh/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'child has value')
okay(wildmap.remove('/hello/dolly/oh/hello'.split('/')), 'removed')
okay(! wildmap.remove('/hello/earth/beings'.split('/')), 'removed does not exist')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello'.split('/')), 'great grand parent exists')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'great parent does not exist')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh'.split('/')), 'parent does not exist')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh/hello'.split('/')), 'target does not exist')
okay(! wildmap.has('/hello/dolly/oh/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'child does not have value')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'child does not exist')
```

```javascript
const wildmap = new WildMap({ single: '*', recursive: '**' })
```

```javascript
function write (path, data) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    mkdirp(key.slice(0, 1).join('/'))
    // Assert that we are not writing file data to a directory node.
    const got = wildmap.get(key)
    if (got != null && got.isDirectory) {
        throw new Error('is directory')
    }
    // Set the data.
    wildmap.set(key, { isDirectory: false, data: data })
}

function mkdirp (path) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    for (let length = key.length; length != 0; length--) {
        const dir = key.slice(0, length)
        const got = wildmap.get(dir)
        if (got != null && ! got.isDirectory) {
            throw new Error('exists')
        }
        wildmap.set(dir, { isDirectory: true })
    }
}

function ls (path) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    const got = wildmap.get(key)
    if (got == null) {
        throw new Error('no entry')
    }
    if (! got.isDirectory) {
        throw new Error('is not directory')
    }
    return wildmap.list(key)
}

function files (path) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    const got = wildmap.get(key)
    if (got == null) {
        throw new Error('no entry')
    }
    if (! got.isDirectory) {
        throw new Error('is not directory')
    }
    return wildmap.glob(key.concat('**'))
        .map(key => ({ key: key, got: wildmap.get(key) }))
        .filter(({ got }) => ! got.isDirectory)
        .map(({ key }) => key.join('/'))
}

function cat (path) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    const got = wildmap.get(key)
    if (got == null) {
        throw new Error('no entry')
    }
    if (got.isDirectory) {
        throw new Error('is directory')
    }
    return got.data
}

write('/usr/bin/node', 'node')
```

Commit message:

Fix broken default constructor.
Also add test for symbols used for single and recursive sigils since
they are what set by the default constructor.

README.md, after:

[![Actions Status](https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap/workflows/Node%20CI/badge.svg)](https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap/actions)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/bigeasy/wildmap/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/bigeasy/wildmap)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

A map keyed by path with wildcard matching.

| What          | Where                                         |
| --- | --- |
| Discussion    | https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap/issues/1   |
| Documentation | https://bigeasy.github.io/wildmap             |
| Source        | https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap            |
| Issues        | https://github.com/bigeasy/wildmap/issues     |
| CI            | https://travis-ci.org/bigeasy/wildmap         |
| Coverage:     | https://codecov.io/gh/bigeasy/wildmap         |
| License:      | MIT                                           |

WildMap installs from NPM.

```
npm install wildmap
```

## Living `README.md`

This `README.md` is also a unit test using the
[Proof](https://github.com/bigeasy/proof) unit test framework. We'll use the
Proof `okay` function to assert out statements in the readme. A Proof unit test
generally looks like this.

```javascript
require('proof')(4, okay => {
    okay('always okay')
    okay(true, 'okay if true')
    okay(1, 1, 'okay if equal')
    okay({ value: 1 }, { value: 1 }, 'okay if deep strict equal')
})
```

You can run this unit test yourself to see the output from the various
code sections of the readme.

```text
git clone git@github.com:bigeasy/wildmap.git
cd wildmap
npm install --no-package-lock --no-save
node test/readme.t.js
```

## Overview

**TODO** Rough draft. Baby English.

WildMap is a map keyed on an array that acts as a path. These keys are usually
derived from file paths or similar. You can use WildMap to store values by a
path and retrieve them individually or through globbing.

The WileMap module exports a single `WildMap` class.

```javascript
const WildMap = require('wildmap')
```

Wnen you construct a WildMap you provide sigils for globbing.  The `single`
sigil is used to match a single element in a path. The `recursive` sigil will
match one or more elements in a path.

```javascript
const wildmap = new WildMap({ single: '*', recursive: '**' })
```

Items in the wild map are indexed by an array that represents a path. The array
must have at least one element representing the root of the path according to
your application. Handily enough, when you split an absolute path string, you
end up with an empty string as the first element. You can use that as your root.

```javascript
okay('/hello/world'.split('/'), [ '', 'hello', 'world' ], 'result of path split')
```

You set a value in the wild map calling `set` with an array path and a key
value.

```javascript
wildmap.set('/hello/world'.split('/'), 'a')
```

To get a value from the wild map you provide the same array key.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.get('/hello/world'.split('/')), 'a', 'get')
```

You can use `undefined` as a value and if you do, you won't be certain if an
item exists in your wild map using `get`. To determine if a path exists and it
has a value assigned use `has`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.has('/hello/world'.split('/')), 'has')
okay(! wildmap.has('/hello/earth'.split('/')), 'has not')
```

The `has` method determines if the path exists in the wild and if a value is
set. Not every path that exists in wild map has a value set. In our example
`/hello` was created automatically when we set `/hello/world`. No value was set
for `/hello`.

```javascript
okay(! wildmap.has('/hello'.split('/')), 'has not automatically created')
```

It does exist however, and that might be nice to know, so we can use `exists` to
determine if a path exists in the wild map regardless of whether it has a value
set.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello/world'.split('/')), 'exists')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello'.split('/')), 'parent exists')
okay(wildmap.exists([ '' ]), 'root exists')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/earth'.split('/')), 'does not exist')
```

Notice that neither `get`, `has`, nor `exists` will  perform any sort of parital
matching. Matching a parent does not return a list of children. Matching a
non-existant child does return a parent. We do that sort of thing with `glob`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.get('/hello'.split('/')), (void(0)), 'get parent')
okay(wildmap.get('/hello/world/wide'.split('/')), (void(0)), 'get missing child')
```

Only `glob` performs globbing. None of the other functions will evaluate the
wildcard.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.get('/hello/*'.split('/')), (void(0)), 'get wildcard does not work')
```

Before we look at globbing let's add another element to our wild map.

```javascript
wildmap.set('/hello/earth/beings'.split('/'), 'b')
```

We use the `glob` method to perform globbing.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.glob('/hello/*'.split('/')), [[ '', 'hello', 'world' ]], 'glob single wildcard')
```

Globbed recursive.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.glob('.hello.**'.split('.')), [[
    '', 'hello', 'world'
], [
    '', 'hello', 'earth'
], [
    '', 'hello', 'earth', 'beings'
]], 'glob recursive wildcard end')
```

Globbed recursive midway. Each recursive glob must match at least one part of
the path.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.glob('/**/world'.split('/')), [[ '', 'hello', 'world' ]], 'glob recursive wildcard end')
```

You can list all the children for a particular node using `list`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.list('/hello'.split('/')), [ 'world', 'earth' ], 'list')
```

If there are no children the list will be empty.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.list('/hello/world'.split('/')), [], 'list empty')
```

If there is no such node at all in the wild map, `list` returns `null`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.list('/hello/dolly'.split('/')), null, 'list null')
```

```javascript
okay(wildmap.glob('.**.**'.split('.')), [[
    '', 'hello', 'world'
], [
    '', 'hello', 'earth'
], [
    '', 'hello', 'earth', 'beings'
]], 'glob recursive double wildcards')
```

One application I've found for WileMap is to model a directory structure for an
`etcd`-alike called [Addendum](https://github.com/bigeasy/addendum).

When we want to remove items from our wild map we once again run into the
distinction between `has` and `exists`.

When we want to move a value from our wild map we use `unset`. If the path has
no children then the path is removed from the tree and it no longer `has` the
bath and the path no longer `exists`. We then look at the parent path.

If we do remove the path we look at the parent path. If it does not have a value
set and it has no more children now that the one child has been removed we
remove it as well.

```text
/
    /hello
        /world => a
        /earth
            beings => b
```

The map now contains the above tree. When we unset `/hello/earth/beings` the
`beings` part no longer has a value and has no children so it is removed from
the tree. Then because `/hello/earth` has no value and no longer has children it
is removed. `/hello` still has a child so it remains.

When we use remove, we remove a path from a tree regardless of whether or not
it has child paths. Once removed look at the parent path. If it does not have a
value set and it has no more children now that the one child has been removed we
remove it as well.

Let's add a path to the wild map.

```javascript
wildmap.set('/hello/dolly/oh/hello/dolly'.split('/'), 'b')
```

Now our wild map tree looks like this.

```text
/
    /hello
        /world => a
        /dolly
            /oh
                /hello
                    /dolly => b
```

When we remove `/hello/dolly/oh/hello` we will remove that path and all
children. We will then remove `/hello/dolly/oh` and then `/hello/dolly`.

```javascript
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello'.split('/')), 'great grand parent exists')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'great parent exists')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh'.split('/')), 'parent exists')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh/hello'.split('/')), 'target exists')
okay(wildmap.has('/hello/dolly/oh/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'child has value')
okay(wildmap.remove('/hello/dolly/oh/hello'.split('/')), 'removed')
okay(! wildmap.remove('/hello/earth/beings'.split('/')), 'removed does not exist')
okay(wildmap.exists('/hello'.split('/')), 'great grand parent exists')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'great parent does not exist')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh'.split('/')), 'parent does not exist')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh/hello'.split('/')), 'target does not exist')
okay(! wildmap.has('/hello/dolly/oh/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'child does not have value')
okay(! wildmap.exists('/hello/dolly/oh/hello/dolly'.split('/')), 'child does not exist')
```

Sigils are specified by the constructor and can be anything you like. We use `*`
and `**` here because they are familiar. Instead of strings you can use symbols
if there are no globbing characters that make sense for your application.

If do not specify any sigils WildMap will use the default sigil symbols
`WildMap.SINGLE` and `WildMap.RECURSIVE`.

```javascript
const wildmap = new WildMap

okay(wildmap.single, WildMap.SINGLE, 'signal symbol')
okay(wildmap.recursive, WildMap.RECURSIVE, 'recursive symbol')

wildmap.set('/hello/world'.split('/'), 'a')

okay(wildmap.glob([ '', 'hello', WildMap.SINGLE ]), [[ '', 'hello', 'world' ]], 'search with single symbol')
okay(wildmap.glob([ '', WildMap.RECURSIVE ]), [[ '', 'hello' ], [ '', 'hello', 'world' ]], 'search with recursive symbol')
```

```javascript
function write (path, data) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    mkdirp(key.slice(0, 1).join('/'))
    // Assert that we are not writing file data to a directory node.
    const got = wildmap.get(key)
    if (got != null && got.isDirectory) {
        throw new Error('is directory')
    }
    // Set the data.
    wildmap.set(key, { isDirectory: false, data: data })
}

function mkdirp (path) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    for (let length = key.length; length != 0; length--) {
        const dir = key.slice(0, length)
        const got = wildmap.get(dir)
        if (got != null && ! got.isDirectory) {
            throw new Error('exists')
        }
        wildmap.set(dir, { isDirectory: true })
    }
}

function ls (path) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    const got = wildmap.get(key)
    if (got == null) {
        throw new Error('no entry')
    }
    if (! got.isDirectory) {
        throw new Error('is not directory')
    }
    return wildmap.list(key)
}

function files (path) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    const got = wildmap.get(key)
    if (got == null) {
        throw new Error('no entry')
    }
    if (! got.isDirectory) {
        throw new Error('is not directory')
    }
    return wildmap.glob(key.concat('**'))
        .map(key => ({ key: key, got: wildmap.get(key) }))
        .filter(({ got }) => ! got.isDirectory)
        .map(({ key }) => key.join('/'))
}

function cat (path) {
    const key = path.split('/')
    const got = wildmap.get(key)
    if (got == null) {
        throw new Error('no entry')
    }
    if (got.isDirectory) {
        throw new Error('is directory')
    }
    return got.data
}

write('/usr/bin/node', 'node')
```
